Introduction


	Body condition score (BCS) is a visual assessment of theamount of fat in a cow’s body. The amount of fat stored by the animal is a direct reflection of the amount of energy and protein that the cow has consumed. Excess energy intake is stored as fat, and adequate protein intake results in maximal muscle deposition. The deposition of fat and muscle leads to the appearance that creates a cow’s BCS. Therefore, BCS is both a good indicator of the past nutritional status of the cow and a way to determine future nutritional needs.


Reasons to Measure Body Condition Score

	Body condition score or change in body condition is a more reliable way to evaluate a cow’s nutritional status than live weight or change in live weight. Live weight alone is not a good measure of overall nutritional status. Most cow herds have a range in frame size and muscling that makes BCS
a better measure of body fat than live weight. Live weight is also affected greatly by gut fill, pregnancy status, forage quality, and forage availability. On many ranches, managers evaluate cow BCS regularly when weighing cows may be impractical. The BCS technique is easy to learn and can help with management decisions.

Why Body Condition Score?

	Body condition scoring is a technique for assessing the condition of livestock at regular intervals. The
purpose of condition scoring is to achieve a balance between economic feeding, good production and good welfare. Condition scoring is particularly useful as an aid to dry cow and pre-calving management. The objective is to ensure that cows enter a new lactation safely whether they are on a controlled diet indoors or outdoors at grass. Subsequently in early lactation the cow is under considerable nutritional pressure and body condition is a vital indicator of excessive weight loss. This can lead to metabolic disorders and other welfare problems and should be avoided. 

Body condition score is a subjective assessment of the amount of fat, or stored energy a cows carries
within her body. Scoring a cow requires only a simple visual assessment of certain parts of the cows
where adipose tissue tends to accumulate. Body condition score has become a simple, yet powerful
tool to adjust feeding and management practices:

	 1.to maximize milk production
	 2.to minimize metabolic disorders in early lactation (ketosis, fatty liver syndrome)
	 3.to minimize reproductive problems (avoid excess negative energy balance in early lactation).


Importance of Body Condition

	There are 4 different class of this problem 

		1.Pre-calving : Condition should be “fit not fat”, and should be such to allow a moderate 			         level of supplementation to prepare cows for early lactation.

		2.At calving : Cows should not calve in an excessively fat condition. Fat cows may
			      develop fatty liver disease or ketosis and are more prone to milk fever, 			      mastitis, lameness and infertility (also retained placenta).

		3.Early lactation : Dairy cows are under considerable nutritional stress and adequate
			              feeding is essential to avoid excessive weight loss. Excessively thin cows                                                                      can suffer discomfort.

		4.At service :  Dairy cows should not be in energy deficit by this stage as this may
			       result in low fertility.


BCS and Management

	BCS has a relationship with many traits, which are important to a dairy farmer. Cows, which score in 	the extreme classes, so too fat or too thin, are culled earlier during their life. Further cows, which
	produce 1.000 kg milk more, the BCS is 0.5 point lower. The relation with fertility is one of the most
	interesting. Cows with one point higher BCS have a 5-day shorter interval from calving to first
	insemination and a 5-day shorter calving interval. 

BCS and Milk Production

	Body condition score is a critical measure of a dairy feeding system's effectiveness (Grant & Keown,
	1993). Adequate body fat reserves promote milk production, reproductive efficiency and herd
	longevity. Excessively fat cows or overly thin cows run much greater risks of metabolic problems,
	lower milk yield, poor conception rates and dystocia (difficulty calving). Failure to attain proper body
	condition or rapid changes in body condition score during early lactation may indicate problems
	in herd health or feeding management. Condition score should be monitored at each reproductive
	examination, including:
	 
		At calving,
	 	Postpartum examinations,
	 	Breeding,
	 	Pregnancy checking,
	 	Late lactation (about 250 days in milk), and
	 	At dry-off.


	
	